# Intro
> Digital accessibility aims to ensure that everyone, regardless of their skills or abilities or disabilities, can **access information**, **technology**, **products**, and **services**.

- Learn from the experience of accessibility experts and disabled people.

- We are only temporarily not having a disability, because **at some point in our life as we get older**, we will have some sort of disability

## Businesses should care about digital accessibility
- for three main reasons. 
- 1. Firstly, there is quite clearly a commercial element. There's a huge untapped market when it comes to disabled people.

- 2. Secondly, it's the right thing to do. There's a clear social and moral element to this.

- 3. Thirdly, there's the legal argument. So it's not something that you can't not do. And there's equality legislation that means that you have to serve and be available for customers with disabilities.

-> Now, let me give you one example. In the '70s, we've had this **safety belt law** in the cars. And there were actually a lot of resistance. We don't believe that now, but people refused to put on the safety belt. But at that time, a law was needed to enforce this to the benefit of everybody. And I think it's the same with accessibility.

## Goal
Learners on this course will discover how to **create documents** that are easy to read, how to develop products that may be more **user friendly,** and perhaps, design **websites** that can be used with assistive technologies.

## Why BFD?
One of the great things about **technology** is that it enables people to do things they cannot do without. For instance, a person who cannot walk will use a wheelchair and then he can move. But if there's a step it's useless. **The environment is not accessible.** In the same way, a ***screen reader*** is a piece of software, which enables a blind person to use a computer but if the **content** is not accessible it's useless.

# Life Is Full of Challenges
- In this video, Neal Ewers talks about challenges and benefits of being blind, as experienced in his life.
- The disability of people may not always be obvious.

- Neal Ewers says, "Life is a challenge".
	- Distance recognization
	- blind since born : cannot understand 'seeing'
	- don't care overweighted
	- can hear who is friendly -> ability to judge a person
	- feel things with hand 

# What is digital accessibility?
- People have very **diverse needs** and abilities. Some products are designed to **take diversity into account** while others are not, and the latter category can be unusable for people with certain specific needs. 
- ***Accessibility*** refers to the **extent** to which products and services can be used by a wide range of people with varying needs and abilities. These **varying needs** and abilities may be due to *impairments*, *illness*, *ageing* or other causes.

- Accessibility can be achieved through a process of inclusive design or universal design (these terms are often used interchangeably).  The idea is to design **products and services** in a *people-centred* way. Inclusive design is not a specific design methodology; it is more like a philosophy that is applied to the design and development of products, systems, services, environments, etc.
- For example, think about a **staircase**. A person with a wheelchair cannot use it unless someone helps them, or there is a lift that can be used to move the person along the stairs together with the wheelchair. By including such a lift in the design of a path from A to B, it is designed **more inclusively than without**. We made the design **more accessible**.

- When you navigate the **digital world**, there are also good and bad examples of accessibility. Some web sites are really **straightforward to use** even if you have big difficulties with your vision. Others are so badly designed that even with full vision you are lost from the start.
- There are many other examples. ***Digital accessibility*** also includes mobile applications, like the apps in your smartphone. It covers both *online and offline activities* that involve a computerised device.  **Digital documents** are another example. Is the PDF file you just made really accessible? Most probably not, because accessibility does (typically) not come about by chance.

## Persona - fictional persons
[[Alexander – colour vision deficiency.pdf]]
[[Anna – dyslexia.pdf]] - 阅读障碍
[[Lars – deaf.pdf]]
[[Carole – blind.pdf]]

# Why Care About Digital Accessibility?
- [[#Businesses should care about digital accessibility]]
- ARIA principle
- Mobil accessibility is of paramount
	- many orgs move to a mobile-first architecture (design for a mobile device first, and then look at how can adapt to the web).

## How should businesses care about accessibility?
- market value: $ 1.38 trillion --> very wide market
	- their employee + customer
	- people with disability + inaccessible products affect the families of people with disabilities 
		- -> 公司损失的不仅仅是残疾客户, 更可能损失这些客户的家人
- corporate social responsibility

## Accessibility is context-dependent
- -> we cannot make things instantly accessible overnight, because of too much staff over there
- equality of access: we need to get everyone thinking about this
	- give people some disability awareness training

### Should accessibility training be mandatory?
- at least at minimum level
- just basic knowledge
- SO : go and find an executive sponsor.

# Accessibility and Usability














































