# Accessible Design for Everyday Living: Outside the home
## **Task: Follow this video** 

[Title Slide]

Accessible Design for Everyday Living  
Outside the Home

[Slide 2 – SST definition –SST image collage)]

For everyday technology encountered outside the home, we decided to focus on Self Service Terminals

Self-service terminals or ‘SSTs’ is one of the several names given to describe the ever-increasing number of machines that offer us services via an automated kiosk, for a variety of purposes.

[Slide 3]

- Such as cash machines (or ATMs) which are meant for personal banking, usually dispensing money

[Slide 4]

- in travel scenarios, tickets from ticket vending machines [image] and check-in machines in airports 

[Slide 5]

- Self check-out in supermarkets where customers themselves scan barcodes on items and pay for their purchases while using the machine 

[Slide 6]

In particular, supermarkets self-service check-outs provoke strong reactions:

 They are hated by some, loved by others. 

Whatever the feelings though, most people can recount at least one unpleasant experience with one of these machines, and some people actively avoid them for this reason - if they have a choice…

  

[Slide 7 - SSTs are everywhere]

  

Because SSTs are everywhere. One constant is that all these self-services are on the increase. This is in part fuelled by our expectation of services being available 24 hours a day, and 7 days a week, 

and we welcome the freedom and the opportunities they bring in most cases.  

A consequence of this is less traditional face-to-face services being offered by people. Indeed, in some cases only machines are available, for instance at train stations on weekends and evenings.   
  

For some people however… SSTs are inaccessible, difficult to understand and use

  

[Slide8 -image of ATM at top of steps]

- being badly situated, such as the ATM in this image. Due to the stairs it is inaccessible to people with mobility issues.

[Slide 9- image of user having to use body to make shadow so as to see the screen]

- or in other case, the location not allow easy interaction, due to the surrounding environment, such as in the pictured case where constant bright sunlight obscures the screen.

[Slide 10- Use images / user stories Carole who is blind, Mary’s arthritic hands /hands in mittens from Week 3]

Sometimes, the problems lie not with the location or environment, but with the terminal itself.

- touch screens and small fiddly buttons or keypads are common complaints.

[Slide 11 image of machine with paper explanations stuck on],

Finally some people find it hard to interact with the machines because they do not understand what is required from them:  For example sometimes the SSTs use difficult language or unfamiliar terminology which leads to ambiguity and confusion.

It is not uncommon to find that those responsible for the service stick extra instruction on to the machines, see this photo of a ticket dispensing machine where this is the case

# Inside the home: domestic appliances
## **Task: Watch the video and think about the message** 
### **Introduction to video** 

In this video, you will learn about some of the problems that people face with the everyday pices of technology found inside their homes.

### **Video transcript:**

Accessible design for everyday living: looking inside our homes 

In the home, what devices are difficult to use or, in some cases, completely **inaccessible**? 

In the interview with Neal Ewers - he talks about his perception as a **blind** person of **washing machine** controls…

Let's take a look at some domestic appliances. What do you notice?

First, a washing machine

Next, a cooker

Finally, a microwave oven

**All these devices tend to have small screen displays for feedback**. This means that to program the appliance it is necessary to check what is displayed. Obviously this is impossible for people who have no or very little vision

People who are blind or vision impaired like Maria, are also mothers and housewives

and everyone needs to eat and keep themselves looking presentable with clean clothes.

They are also difficult for other reasons:

- **older** people may not be able to see the display comfortably
- people who are **shorter** than average or sitting in a **wheelchair** may not be able to see the display because of the angle they are viewing from

Not all problems are to do with a display and another issue is that of function overload. 

Most home appliances these days are extremely feature rich which may be desirable for marketing purposes but doesn't help with usability and accessibility. Even simple appliances like toasters may have many settings

As an older person, I need my reading glasses and good light…but I also need to remember what I should be doing… 


Already we can see that there are some lessons to be learned. For example not to rely only on a small screen display for output but to have other sources of feedback such as audio or at the very least ‘earcons’  such as beeps and buzzes…

Or that the controls have to be located on the appliance, maybe they can be accessed straight from your favorite mobile device. That way the controls can be held at a height that is comfortable for the individual and and with an adjustable size and visibility of the interface controls to suit them.

  

The display could also work like a screen reader reading aloud what is on the screen 

also other types of input could be used instead of touch such as talking to the device with voice recognition software

  

As you can understand these are all accessibility features that you have learned about in previous weeks 

There you saw them in other settings such as your computer or mobile devices so why not apply them to household appliances as well

# Problems with Self-Service Technology (SSTs)

## **Task: Read the article and examine the mentioned resources** 

Self-service machines can be problematic for all sorts of reasons. 

Self Service Technologies (SSTS) present problems that include physical accessibility in the placement of machines as well as digital accessibility problems.

Some of these are described in the article entitled KÄKÄTE Project's study: The elderly have problems using ATMs and payment terminals [[http://www.ikateknologia.fi/en/uncategorised/kakate-projects-study-the-elderly-have-problems-using-atms-and-payment-terminals.html](http://www.ikateknologia.fi/en/uncategorised/kakate-projects-study-the-elderly-have-problems-using-atms-and-payment-terminals.html)]

Some of the main ones to do with digital accessibility are: 

- Many self-service machines rely heavily on users’ visual senses- for instance reading screen displays or instructions printed on the machine. 
- People who are blind or vision impaired cannot see the display at all and cannot use touch screens 
- Dyslexic and low literacy users cannot always understand the information displayed on the screen or their instructions of use 
- People with problems of manual dexterity, for instance missing limbs, or hand tremors or problems with hand eye coordination have difficulties to use touch screens
- Older people, people with manual or vision difficulties, people who are low literacy users need more time to interact and are often ‘timed out’
- People using wheelchairs, may not be able to get close enough to use the machines or the controls of the interface may be positioned too high for them to use. This can also be a problem for people who are of small stature and children. 


That is why some of the solutions to these problems involve the use of ‘talking machines’ that speak aloud what is written on the screen into the user’s earphones;  machines that accept voice commands; the use of smart and ‘contactless’ cards. These solutions can solve some of the problems associated with visual impairment and manual dexterity and the need to get close to the machines. In addition, the cards can have information associated to them that will tell the machine to transform the interface to the language and the font that the user prefers…


Other solutions require are not so much concerned with digital accessibility as the siting of the machines themselves. Deployers of such machines need to understand how important it is to situate the machines where their use will not be bothered by strong sunlight, or overhead lighting, and where they are accessible to people using wheelchairs or walkers, or having restricted mobility, for instance, a young mother with a child in a push chair.

Sometimes just a better understanding of the needs of people and the problems they face when those needs are not taken into account, is enough to reveal the solutions needed. An example of collaboration between the banking industry and an organisation advocating for people who are blind or vision impaired is reported here, it concerns making cards used in banking services more accessible

[http://www.rbs.com/news/2015/february/rbs-and-natwest-launch-first-ever-accessible-debit-and-savings-c.htm](http://www.rbs.com/news/2015/february/rbs-and-natwest-launch-first-ever-accessible-debit-and-savings-c.htm)

Are the solutions above enough?

None can be panacea… 

For instance, not everyone can hold a card and insert it into a machine, and many people can have problems to remember their PIN (Personal Identity Number) that is required to use most cards. 

We should continue to try to find alternatives, such as contactless cards and biometric technologies to recognise a finger print instead of a PIN 

  

Remember that with each effort we design things that make interaction with technologies easier for everyone! Such design challenges designers to be creative and turn their creativity into innovations that everyone enjoys using!

# Classifying the problems people have with self-service terminals (SSTs)

## **Task: Classifying the problems people have with SSTs (discussion)**

What have been your problematic experiences, or those of your family and friends with self-service terminals?

Please tell us, but try to divide your experiences into problems that have to do with the: 

1. physical accessibility of the machines in terms of location and physical attributes of the machine enclosure, for instance:

- height of the interface elements, such as slots, keypads, screen, 
- a design that lets someone in a wheelchair get close enough to the machine to operate it comfortable 

1. the interface components, for instance:

- screens, buttons, slots, instructions for use /symbols marked on the surface of the machine (fascia) or on the screen 
- other ‘soft’ components (online keypads, buttons, etc.)

1. interaction features, for instance:

- understanding the task sequence, 
- understanding and navigating the information on the display, 
- understanding the feedback, 
- understanding how to cancel, or exit from the interaction, etc.
- understanding how to ask for more time if in danger of being ‘timed out’

## Checklist:

## **Task: Classifying the problems people have with SSTs (discussion)**

What have been your problematic experiences, or those of your family and friends with self-service terminals?

Please tell us having divided your experiences into the problems classified below and mark their accessibility accordingly. 

1. Physical accessibility of the machines in terms of location and physical attributes of the machine enclosure, for instance:

- height of the interface elements. Can they be reached? 

- slots: Yes/No
- keypads: Yes/No
- screen: Yes/No 
- other: Yes/No 

Comment:

- a design that lets someone in a wheelchair get close enough to the machine to operate it in comfort Yes No

Comment: 

1. The design of interface components.  Are they easy to use and accessible?

- screens: Yes/No
- buttons:  Yes/No
- slots: Yes/No 
- instructions for use: Yes/No
- symbols marked on the surface of the machine (fascia) or on the screen: Yes/No
- other ‘soft’ components: 

- online keypads: Yes/No
- buttons: Yes/No
- other: Yes/No

Comment: 

1. Interaction features.  Are they easy to find and understandable? 

- task sequence: Yes/No  
- display information: Yes/ No  
- feedback: Yes/No  
- cancel, or exit:  Yes/No  
- time out:  Yes/No
- other: Yes/No

# Enabling Everyone Everywhere: Understanding the impact of inaccessibilities

## **Task: Follow this video** 

[Title Slide 1]

In this step we will talk a bit about the fact that the problems of using technology and machines, in the home and outside of it, are not limited to practical concerns of inconvenience.

Rather there are deeper impacts that affect people. 

[Slide 2]

These often have socio-psychological repercussions: 

- Anxiety: especially for time dependent actions or when there is a queue to use the SST
- Indecision: unable to make choices because of pressures of time or social pressure
- Trust: not believing the machine is able to understand the request made
- Security and Privacy concerns: worrying about others finding out information about you and using it to harm you or your property

  

All this has the effect of undermining people’s confidence to carry out transactions and live in the modern world. It impacts on their feelings of self-efficacy and in some cases their ability to live independently and to be autonomous.

  

Listen to the following real life stories recounted by people who would not consider themselves disabled or elderly, but who found their inability to use self-service terminals a bewildering and disempowering experience:

  

[Slide 3 Storyboard 1)

“ my husband had a uncomfortable experience that turned out OK in the end…he was literally stranded in an end-of-the-line Parisian metro station, when he discovered he did not have enough change for a metro ticket. He had a 5 euro note, and no change. The ticket cost was 1.50 euros and the machine only took coins. It was obviously expected that everyone would know this and have coins with them. It was mid-morning, and there was no one around, no officials, no commuters. Also there were no shops, just a deserted subway station. He does not speak a word of French. He was thinking about how he should leave the station to get some change, but was worried about losing his way. He had passed no shops on the way to the station just blocks of flats, and it was too far to go back to his hotel. Eventually a lady came into the station and he asked her for help by miming his situation: showing her his money, the machine and shrugging his shoulders.. She could have walked on and ignored him. But she didn’t. She did not have any change either, but she did have a spare metro ticket that she gave him. Without her, he might have still been standing there! He is now very nervous about situations like this.”

  

[Slide 4 Storyboard 2]

  

“I found it really hard to understand how to use the self-scanning check-out machine in the supermarket. But I did not want to let the challenge ‘beat’ me, particularly as there are now only one or two ‘real’ cashiers in my local supermarket. I chose a time of day when I knew it was normally quiet, and I just picked up a few things and took my time to read the instructions carefully. I tried to do things step-by-step, but the instructions were going by on a ‘ticker tape’ on a screen and they kept cycling through before I could read them and understand them properly. Seeing I was there for some time, a shop assistant came over to ask me if I wanted help. I told her I was trying to learn to use the machine. She took this to mean that I wanted to be helped, so she said, “it is really simple, look, you just do this, and this, and then pay”.  So, although she was very kind, I still do not know how to do the check-out on my own…” [Title Slide]

  

## **Inaccessible Everyday Technology: deeper impacts?**

## **Task: Inaccessible Everyday Technology: deeper impacts? (Reading and Reflection task)**

What are the deeper impacts of this inability to use machines beyond the practical problems? With this reading and reflection task, we will take some time to examine the deeper impacts of not being able to use everyday technologies. Is it just a nuisance, -an inconvenience-, or can it mean far more? 

We know from personal experience and articles in the local press about the frustration and anxiety people experience with these machines, both in the home and outside. 

But there are other deeper impacts that affect their lives in far-reaching ways…

For instance, it has been found that people who cannot use their consumer electronics and domestic appliances with confidence, begin to have high levels of anxiety about using the machines, and eventually give up using them, unless someone is there to help them. 

This leads to loss of choice, for instance, when people cannot watch the TV channels they want.

Some people report that they cannot wash their clothes and cook their food without worrying unduly about the outcome of damaged clothes or uncooked food. This is a great blow to independence, and is in fact dis-empowerment of people with disabilities and older people. 

You can read more about this in a paper called _Mastering Technology for Greater Autonomy: Device familiarisation for older users via games._ It is available at [www.ddarz.net](http://www.ddarz.net/) (look in publications for the year 2012)

Marketing studies on supermarket self-service check-out have shown that people who do not master using the technology, especially older people, suffer from low self-esteem and low self-efficacy. This is part of not being able do things for themselves. They feel that they are not able to cope with the modern world and it is not designed for them: they are ‘designed out’. Worse, they are a burden on others and must depend on them to help them to things they used to do themselves, like purchasing tickets or groceries, and getting money out of the bank. 

Take a look at this research article by Wang, C et al. entitled _The roles of Habit Self-Efficacy and Satisfaction in Driving Continued Use of Self-Service Technologies: A longitudinal Study_ (you will need to register to ResearchGate to use it) [link to article: Wang, C. et al. [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258158781_The_Roles_of_Habit_Self-Efficacy_and_Satisfaction_in_Driving_Continued_Use_of_Self-service_Technologies_A_Longitudinal_Study](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258158781_The_Roles_of_Habit_Self-Efficacy_and_Satisfaction_in_Driving_Continued_Use_of_Self-service_Technologies_A_Longitudinal_Study) ]

The technology is here to stay: The following trade news article talks about how widespread -despite problems- is the use of self-service checkouts in the UK. It states that only 10% of the population have not used it [http://www.kioskmarketplace.com/news/nearly-one-in-two-uk-shoppers-need-help-with-self-service-checkout/](http://www.kioskmarketplace.com/news/nearly-one-in-two-uk-shoppers-need-help-with-self-service-checkout/)


# Solving Accessibility Problems

## **Task: Solving accessibility problems (Reading and study task)**

There are two main ways to deal with the problems of inaccessibility in everyday technologies. Both are necessary

It might help to think of them like this:

1. **“Do not try to re-invent the wheel**”:  Instead, make use of the large amount of **recommendations**, such as standards and guidelines which encapsulate much accessibility knowledge and give high level principles as well as step by step techniques to follow. 
2. **”Stress test”:** **involve a wide range of potential users** when you are designing and developing something. Their feedback is invaluable, nor will it only be reactions, potential users can ‘co-create’ using participatory design methods, and offer insights that can be very significant. 

It is also rare that something is created that is so specialised that it cannot be used by others- For instance an application developed for people who are blind, was also useful for people with colour vision problems. 

It is also important to be aware that increasingly there are **laws** passed to protect the rights of people with disabilities.

Examples of ‘Accessibility’ Legislation

There have been some cases that have made headlines and forced changes in practice as ‘offenders’ not only faced financial penalties but also the ‘bad press’ of being inaccessible. 

For instance, at this link [https://www.w3.org/WAI/bcase/target-case-study](https://www.w3.org/WAI/bcase/target-case-study) you can read about a court case involving a US organization called Target. 

In some cases, legislation is being passed that will make it illegal and enforce penalties if designs do not take account of accessibility issues. Enforcement backed by legislation is advocated by people who are frustrated to see that accessibility solutions in one area, for instance ‘talking ATMs’ in the U.S., have not necessarily meant accessible self-service check-in kiosks at the airport, or non-visual interfaces for domestic appliances. Since these solutions are not voluntarily carried over, they feel that legislation is necessary to ensure this is done.

The National Federation of the Blind in the United States have mounted a campaign for legislation on domestic appliances explaining:

“especially for blind people,   consumer electronics; domestic appliances; and self-service terminals or kiosks are among those products that are becoming increasingly hard to use unaided. This is a new trend that has come about because of changes in technology. These changes have led to the increased use of touch screens and interactive visual interfaces, replacing traditional controls such as knobs, switches, and buttons on consumer electronics, home appliances, as well as on self-service kiosks. Touch screens and interactive visual interfaces have rendered most consumer electronics, home appliances & self- service kiosks inaccessible through nonvisual means. This has the effect of widening the digital divide between blind consumers and their sighted peers and threatening the employment, independence, and productivity of blind people”. [https://nfb.org/images/nfb/publications/bm/bm12/bm1203/bm120305.htm](https://nfb.org/images/nfb/publications/bm/bm12/bm1203/bm120305.htm)

In another task we will look in more depth at the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. [http://www.un.org/disabilities/convention/conventionfull.shtml](http://www.un.org/disabilities/convention/conventionfull.shtml)

This agreement has lately given new impetus to the legislative work.

# Enabling Everyone Everywhere: avoiding to unthinkingly create barriers

In this ‘video’, the accessibility of technologies that are emerging and proliferating such as queuing management and health monitors are considered.

In spite of what we know already about inaccessibility, often new generation of products seems not to carry forward lessons already learnt, and design new products that are inaccessible. Watch the video to see what we mean.

## **Task: Follow this video** 

[Slide 1: Title Slide] 

Enabling everyone everyday.

The object of this lesson is to be aware and not unthinkingly create barriers in future products and systems

  

[Slide 2]

Now we would like to project your thoughts into the near future. Many products are in development at the moment, and we hope that **now** you will be able to understand if these will be easy to access, use and understand, 

or whether they will be erecting barriers to use 

or even be completely inaccessible to some groups of people. 

  

[Slide 3]

Even as we look around, we can see examples of everyday technologies that are gaining ground and becoming widely available, but are not accessible to everyone and are excluding some people from their use. 

  

Let us look at two examples again, one outside the home, and one inside the home

  

[Slide 4]

1. Queuing Management Systems 

The use of Queuing management systems are so simple and innocuous that most people do not think twice about them. 

Queuing systems consist of those little machines that that issue you a piece of paper with a number on it. This means that you can queue for a service, without actually standing in a queue or a ‘line’. Above the desks or workstations of service personnel you can often see an electronic display board or screen, where the number of the person currently being served is displayed. This is to help you to understand when it is going to be your turn. The tickets themselves sometimes give you other information beside the number of your turn, like, for instance, a message that gives you the average time it takes to be served, and extra information like what is the time of day and the date…Often a lot of extra numbers!

  

[Slide 5]

So what is wrong with these, why are they difficult for some people to use?

  

Here are some of the problems: 

- Yet again, we see that these machines violate the principle of ‘perceptible information’(4th principle of UD), they mostly use one mode of presentation only, the visual mode. For a person who is blind or vision impaired, they need to locate the machine, and the button to use, or in the case of a touch screen, which part to touch, as well as to follow the progress of the queue on the display board.
- People with dyslexia and those with dexterity problems can also find these systems difficult
- Lately some machines offer more than one alternative, as they can offer different types of queues. For instance 

- in the pharmacies in Norway, there may be one queue for prescription medicines purchase, and another queue for non-prescription items; 
- in the Netherlands, in a central railway station there is one queue for international tickets information and tickets, and a second a queue for national travel information and tickets 
- Of course these queues are virtual, people are not standing in a line, and at anytime a person serving one queue, i.e. prescription medicines can switch to non-prescription items.

  

[Slide 6]

Some of the problems can be classified using the same categories we discussed earlier on: For instance environmental barriers. In the photograph here, the black wastebin has been pushed in front of the touch screen that is set at a lower level for use by people in wheelchairs and people of low height 

  

[Slide 7]

Again, in this example, the need for extra explanation is evident. The self-service terminal is offering tickets, but the machine itself is just a touch screen, to get a ticket, the adjacent machine is a printer.

  

[Slide 8] 

- For some people, it is difficult to understand the numbers, especially when there are two sets or more of numbers and the runs are very similar. Other people may confuse 232 on their ticket with 223 on the indicator board 
- The number on the ticket may be printed too small for people to see, 
- Some people confuse the number of their turn with the number of the desk they need to go to be served

[Slide 9]

- The instructions of the issuing machine can be hard to understand, e.g. In the post office, the machine was marked “queue A for parcels, queue B for pensions” People did not know what do press if they wanted to buy a postage stamp. [cartoon image]

[Slide 10] 

- Depending on the service personnel, some are very strict in their policing of the service, if someone misses their turn they may decide not to accept a number that has passed, but instead instruct the customer to get another ticket, (and therefore queue again). Service personnel, unless they have received training, may not be able to distinguish whether a person has a real problem or if they are just trying ‘to cheat’ the system. 

[Slide 11]

- Their increasing ubiquity means that on the one hand people will learn to use them or find workarounds, but on the other, more places will start to use them, and exclude people with vision or print disabilities (including dyslexics) and those with some types of dexterity problems. 

  

[Slide 12]

Inside many homes today one may find devices for health monitoring, many of these recently are classed as smart wearables. Worn mostly on the wrist, they monitor various body activities (heart rate, blood pressure, etc.). According to the statistics, the market for these is growing:

  

“In the US, 8 in 10 adults have at least heard of wearables and nearly 1 in 5 plans to buy one in the near future, whether a smart watch, a health device, a fitness tracker or a pair of smart glasses. As of 2013, the worldwide wearables market is expected to grow steadily up to some 12.6 billion U.S. dollars in 2018. Projections show health and fitness devices sales alone to double in 2015 compared to the previous year” (Source STATISTA [http://www.statista.com/statistics/413265/health-and-fitness-tracker-worldwide-unit-sales-region/](http://www.statista.com/statistics/413265/health-and-fitness-tracker-worldwide-unit-sales-region/) )

  

Market research also shows that many of these are brought by younger people for their older family members as good ideas, or by older people themselves (the ‘’boomer consumers”!). People are living longer, and anxious to preserve their health and fitness levels

[Slide 13]

Are they being used? Unfortunately many of these are not well designed for use by older people or people with disabilities, -who might sometimes the people who would benefit most from using them. 

  

Some of the problems that have been reported are: 

- Controls pressed by accident
- Displays too small to read, or contrast is bad
- Information on displays confusing
- Information is only available on screen

  

[Slide 14]

**You might like to take a look at the exclusion calculator** that has been produced by the Engineering Design Centre at the University of Cambridge UK 

  

Using this exclusion calculator you can check to see how many people in the United Kingdom would be excluded by a particular design ([http://www.inclusivedesigntoolkit.com/betterdesign2/exclusioncalc/exclusioncalc.html](http://www.inclusivedesigntoolkit.com/betterdesign2/exclusioncalc/exclusioncalc.html)) 

  

[Slide 15]

A further problem is that when the device looks like a monitoring device some people do not want to wear it because it is stigmatizing 

  

[Slide 16]

We hope that as you read and begin to experience new ideas for technology uses you will now feel confident about what is needed to make these products and services usable by a wide range of users and how to refrain from repeating the same mistakes over and over again. This can lead to more creativity in designing new products.


# Involving users in the design and development of products, systems and services

## **Task: Read the article and examine the mentioned resources** 

There are many **different ways of involving users** in the *design and development* of products, systems and services, but one of the very rewarding outcomes are the multitude of insights that emerge.

- When researchers were examining the problems that people with disabilities faced using ATMs [Inredis video [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DWKMPaQ2xQAo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DWKMPaQ2xQAo)] they discovered that jargon free language was beneficial not just for people with certain types of disability, but for all users, and they simplified the language, removing financial jargon, making the interface more ‘straightforward’ .
- When researchers were working on new designs for ATMs they discovered that privacy was a major concern of users. [[http://thefinancialbrand.com/12706/bbva-ideo-atm-of-the-future/](http://thefinancialbrand.com/12706/bbva-ideo-atm-of-the-future/)]
- When researchers were developing new ways to interact with ticket vending machines, they asked users about all their preferences in order to build menus that people could then use to create a personalized menu of things they wanted on self-service terminals (called public digital terminals in the video).[link to APSIS4All video [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UoLyOzwELKk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UoLyOzwELKk)]. 
- This experience reminds us that not all blind people have the same needs or even the same manifestation of their disability, instead they have preferences as to the ways that they would like to interact. Another example of this is where a person who is deaf would prefer to read captions rather than watch an avatar communicating with sign language. 

Building such flexibility into the devices and applications that we use, allows us to adapt according to circumstance. See the OER entitled: “CaptionIt”. Here Professor Zimmermann explains that when watching a film, he would not normally turn on captions, but sometimes he uses them if he finds the audio hard to understand.

Turning now to how to involve users. Here is an example. Ricability [ [www.Rica.org.uk](http://www.rica.org.uk/)] is a UK-based independent consumer research charity that produces free, practical information for older and disabled people. It carries out research with user panels made up from over 400 consumers who are older and disabled. You can read more about their work on their work site.

Here is an interesting insight from users. Ricability performed a survey in Spring 2015 and asked 300 of its panelists to answer 4 questions: 

1. What you like? 
2. What you don’t like?
3. What you need?
4. Your tips

  

One of the answers for 2. “What you don’t like” was: 

“_Badly designed products; too many gimmicks, too much technology inappropriately used, failure of designers to grasp basic fundamentals_.”

While one of the answers for 3. “What you need” was:

_“Involve customers in every stage of design of a product or service, instead of thinking you are 'knowing what people want'.”_

You can see the answers to the survey here [[http://www.rica.org.uk/node/19205](http://www.rica.org.uk/node/19205)]

Organisations like ANEC [[www.anec.eu](http://www.anec.eu/)] promote consumerinvolvement in standards. They have a group dedicated to working on accessibility issues in order to ensure that these are taken up in standards. In this way standards take account of a wide range of users and their needs

There are many more such findings, and many methods and techniques for including users in the design process. In the OER entitled:”What you need for user testing” you can see how to include users in testing web accessibility. If you are interested in this user involvement aspect of accessibility you will find that there is a lot of information about this, and indeed whole courses devoted to the subject.

# Recommendations: standards, principles, guidelines and best practices, ISO, W3C WAI,CEN/CENELEC

## **Task: Read the article and examine the mentioned resources** 

  

There are various resources that can help you to understand what can be done to bring accessibility to products, systems and services. These are grouped here into: 

- Standards
- Principles
- Guidelines
- Best Practices 

All these can help lead to innovation: designers trying out new ideas often inspired by users’ ‘coping strategies’ or by using their design training to find out what people need and want, in order to look for creative ways to respond to those needs and wants.

  

**Standards**, refers to both those produced by formal standards organisations like the International Organization for Standardization, better known by its short name ISO [ [www.iso.org](http://www.iso.org/) ] as well as to standards developed by groups of stakeholders, including large corporations, for example the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). 

A part of the W3C called the ‘Web Accessibility Initiative’ (WAI) has developed the web content accessibility guidelines (WCAG 2.0) see OER: Introduction to Web Accessibility

Standards serve to give guidance to organisations that manufacture or purchase goods and services, they also give backing to the legislation that we saw in the previous step, in the sense that they are the references that the legislation depends upon. 

However another important function is that they also serve as valuable resources of condensed knowledge. 

For instance, Guide 71 [[http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=57385](http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=57385) ]

 is an ISO document that has been produced as a guide for standardisers but gives a very good overview of how to go about making products and services accessible. 

You can read a news item from ISO about Guide 71 here [[http://www.iso.org/iso/home/news_index/news_archive/news.htm?refid=Ref1911](http://www.iso.org/iso/home/news_index/news_archive/news.htm?refid=Ref1911) ]  and follow this link  [[http://www.cencenelec.eu/standards/Guides/Pages/default.aspx](http://www.cencenelec.eu/standards/Guides/Pages/default.aspx)]  to look at the document itself. (Note: Guide 71 and CEN guide 6 are the same documents)

_Activity_ : Can you find in the document the section where it gives you advice about providing users with more than one way to access information and to interact? 

  

**Principles:**  Another resource are sets of principles. For instance the 7 principles of Universal Design, are very useful, acting as a memory aid to cover both product, ICT and environmental aspects of accessibility. 

They are easy to memorise and then can be used as a practical check list by which to evaluate products and services. You can download a printable poster of them here [link [www.ncsu.edu/ncsu/design/cud/pubs_p/docs/poster.pdf](http://www.ncsu.edu/ncsu/design/cud/pubs_p/docs/poster.pdf)

 If you prefer a text version here is the link [http://www.ncsu.edu/ncsu/design/cud/about_ud/udprinciplestext.htm](http://www.ncsu.edu/ncsu/design/cud/about_ud/udprinciplestext.htm)

Looking at these 7 principles, you will see that already we have seen several of them in action in the OERs on the theme of Enabling Everyone Everyday. For instance:

- we have found that it is important to build in flexibility to designs so that they can accommodate people’s needs and preferences, (2nd principle);
- we have seen that information must be perceivable (4th principle) – if blind people cannot see the information displayed, they could hear it, similarly deaf people can be warned by a visual signal, such as a flashing light. 
- we also saw in our discussion of the positioning of self-service machines, so that they require minimum physical effort (6th principle) and allow and size and space for approach and use (7th principle).

A further set of high level principles is to be found in the most recent version of the WCAG guidelines This set of guidelines has been adopted by ISO as a standard (ISO/IEC 40500:2012) and can be found by following the links here [http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=58625](http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=58625)

  

**Guidelines**: next, in this quick tour of resources about ensuring accessibility, we should also mention the ‘Guidelines on Public Access Terminals’ (another term for SSTs). These guidelines were carefully crafted so that they would follow a similar structure to the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines, and provide firstly the guideline and then suggestions for achieving it. You can see them here: [[http://universaldesign.ie/Technology-ICT/Irish-National-IT-Accessibility-Guidelines/Public-Access-Terminals/](http://universaldesign.ie/Technology-ICT/Irish-National-IT-Accessibility-Guidelines/Public-Access-Terminals/)]

Even just a quick read through the resources in this step, should be enough to convince you that there is a wealth of information about accessibility ready-to-hand. What is needed is for people to know about its existence in order to consult it, but first and foremost to be motivated to work on accessibility, which has so many interesting and worthwhile challenges, that can make a difference to people who really need it, but as well, to all of us.

  

**Best Practice**: Finally we can look at examples of good accessible design. For domestic appliances, these exist in lists of recommendations from support organisations. Take a look, for instance, at the booklet: “Choosing cookers, ovens, hobs and microwaves: A guide to choosing cooking appliances for the home for people who are sight impaired” [[http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk/researchandknowledge/publications/cookers-ovens-hobs-microwaves](http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk/researchandknowledge/publications/cookers-ovens-hobs-microwaves)] . 

The booklet lists features to look for on appliances: such as Tactile feedback of controls (with ‘raised bumps’ on controls or on buttons that push in or out) or Audio feedback such as ‘talking microwaves’, as well as beeps and buzzes (called ‘earcons’) to alert you to some state of the machine. 

  

**Innovation**: Sometimes designers are helped to innovate by seeing how people overcome accessibility problems, for instance using support animals to assist physically disabled people by making the washing machine operable by a dog see JTM : Woof to Wash [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zzF888HFg7E](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zzF888HFg7E) ]


